[Music]
hey everybody
welcome to another episode of
conversations with tom i am here today
with somebody who i am extraordinarily
excited to talk about
talk to heather heing thank you so much
for joining me today
thank you very much for having me tom
absolutely so you
um we were talking just before we
started rolling about evolutionary uh
biology which of course is your
strong suit um and i want to dive right
into that
there's something going on
in culture today where it seems like i
think it was douglas murray that talks
about
how you know there were things that we
all knew up until yesterday and now it's
like
we're somehow it's you know become this
weird thing where
there's not agreement and the one sort
of taboo subject that i've become
absolutely obsessed with
that you talk really eloquently about is
the differences between men and women
and i know that like this is a hot
button topic for people but i
i find it very intriguing and i want to
start
what is it that has made this a hot
button issue
oh wow what is it that has made a hot
i'm not sure i know the answer to that
framed that way
um you know some of it
some of it is originally legitimate
concern about traditional and
increasingly archaic gender roles
right and you know emerging from sort of
first and second wave feminism of which
i'm a fan and i always identified with
um you know seeing that they're seeing
that there were socially imposed
differences
between male and female gender roles
some people
extrapolated i would argue wrongly that
those differences were entirely socially
imposed that were in the language of
academia a social construct
entirely right and you know the fact is
that we can see by looking at other
cultures by looking at non-weird
cultures
by looking at what babies do you know
before before culture has a chance to
impose itself in the weird countries or
in countries that don't have the weird
influences in so far as that's possible
anymore
you might want to define weird people
that have never heard that acronym
before
absolutely so weird all caps acronym
western educated industrialized rich
democratic
um so you know all the countries you
would imagine you know europe japan u.s
canada and you know maybe including some
of you know what used to be called first
world but that's no longer
exactly considered the right way to
describe it so
you know are are the things that we see
between men and women that are different
typically in those weird countries
entirely a social construct
no they're not how do we know because
uh in other cultures men and women are
still different
babies show differences in terms of girl
and boy babies show differences in terms
of what they do
but there there was
for sure at least you know we can think
back to like the mad men era
1950s 1960s gender roles
in the us and see that a lot of people
clung to those in at least in the us i
mean that's you know we're both
americans we can stick to the us
because it's what we know best and
imagine that that was the way it ought
to be
so this was there was sort of a an error
in applying what was to imagine what
should be
and the naturalistic fallacy it's the
same error um
that eugenicists make that you know that
um that social darwinists make that this
the the thing that is currently what is
going on
in culture is what nature described or
what nature needed it to be
and that's just not true so i think that
there was
truly a legitimate and good faith
pushback against
that error but in the modern era
it's become an activist talking point
and it's you know there there's so many
things that
activists are doing as you say douglas
murray writes about this brilliantly and
talks about this brilliantly
um in the madness of crowds and and in
his interviews since
especially um it is
it is remarkable how many things we
appear not to know anymore that we used
to know until yesterday
and some of them are a little
complicated and
the the thing about sex with regard to
are men and women actually different on
average
this just isn't complicated it's it is
in some ways
the most hot button of the topics and
it's also the easiest one
to to deal with because there's just
so much evidence from 500 million years
back
right that we are sexually reproducing
organisms
that therefore have different strategies
because we have because they're too
sexist
so when i think about um what you just
said seems so self-evident and the way
that i've always walked through it is
you're willing to accept that
a woman has a uterus so that's obviously
different than what's going on in a guy
you would think that there are areas of
the brain that are going to determine
what happens to that uterus so
it's like we're we're comfortable i
think everybody is comfortable
up until a point but there's some weird
moment where it breaks down
where it's like well i was comfortable
with that but now i'm not comfortable
with this it and
maybe you have already identified it
which is this
very sort of american ideal of the woman
is staying at home and the man is going
out and conquering that women are
pushing back and saying no i can do more
than just rear children but if i were
going to put like my finger
hard on a point that seems to be
what creates some of the fervor around
this is that
there is a sense that
men have had it better or easier or
something and therefore
to have parody of thought and action and
all of that
is to um do it right
and that's the part that i want to tease
apart and you
you and brett dealt with this head-on
you did a video where is it better to be
a man or a woman
and you guys were very playful about it
but like in all seriousness do you see
in in a weird society using the acronym
yeah is there reason to believe it
actually is better to be male and
therefore that women should be trying to
um posture like a guy would typically
posture
yeah well i think that's actually that's
two different questions both of which
are big and important
is it better to be a male in a weird
society
and if so is it is it
the best move for a woman to act as male
as possible in order to
uh you know best realize her goals and
aspirations
uh the first you know in in general
putting aside
society it is it is not right better to
be male or female at
just the evolutionary level uh any any
time
either sex becomes more valuable and
that's sort of a metaphorical valuable
in terms of being rare because
a whole bunch of one sex has been killed
off say from war
or um or infant mortality that
affects one sex more than another for
you know any number of reasons
that sex that is more rare will become
more valuable and more of that sex will
be produced
um so you know it's easy to imagine and
this this is a question i used to ask my
my students when i was a college
professor uh whenever i taught this
which was
most most programs that i taught you
know what what do you think what's
what's it better to be
and you know usually they saw that it
was kind of a trick question coming but
to to some degree i could usually get
um a few guys to say well it's better to
be a guy and
a few women to say i you know i like
being a woman
but of course it's not the the question
the ultimate question you go far enough
back
and it's not like what do you prefer
it's what is it actually better to be
there is no better right like we imagine
just at
just at the reproductive success level
you know just talking about the the
basic
evolutionary stuff of how many copies of
yourself do you leave in the next
generation
we all have in our heads well genghis
khan you know left
however many it was hundreds of kids
right like hundreds of copies of himself
right and how many kids has the most
successful
woman most reproductively successful
woman had
it's some improbably crazy number like
and i don't i don't yeah
right so how's that possible
how is that even possible right so lots
of twins about the triplets
and just you know started early stopped
late
not a good life right like not a happy
life
in in any way and obviously the vast
majority of women
have an order of magnitude or less kids
than that
um but almost all women reproduce some
and in a society where there's a genghis
khan there's a whole lot of men who
leave no kids at all
who leave no who leave no mark in the
next generation at the genetic level so
on average you know every guy in a
stable population
leaves about two kids and every woman
leaves about two kids
but the variance as is so is this true
across so many domains
is much lower for women so almost all
women
i want to get in here though and so
that's at the population level that's
like an evolutionary thing i get that
but like for me technically my life is
sort of worthless from that standpoint
i've chosen not to have kids
um and but my life life like the thing
that i actually do on a day-to-day basis
is awesome and i love it
and so when i think about so
one thing i learned from having business
partners so you're building a business
together you get into an argument and
you're like
this guy's a [__] and you're just like
how can they possibly be thinking the
way that they're thinking
and what i realized was i know they're
not dumb they're incredibly intelligent
so when two smart people are disagreeing
what i found was there was a base
assumption that they had that was going
unquestioned
and once you get to the base assumption
that's driving their
their sort of surface level argument
then you figure out where things are
really going wrong so for instance if
you were to say
well it's what life is really about is
how
traditionally successful you are how
much money you make how high you climb
in a hierarchy
and that's what matters prestige status
and so if women buy into that
and now traditionally male traits feed
into that
aggression um you know working insane
hours
and then society rewards that and we all
love the praise
of society now you get how if your base
assumption is the highest value
is that prestige climbing the hierarchy
then you begin to understand why people
would adopt traditionally masculine
traits so at the individual personal
level like here's what i really want to
know
and i'll give you sort of my like real
secret sort of thing that drives
go ahead before you say that though let
me just let me just jump in and say
um in other primate societies and other
species of primates
yes there is ev every species of primate
that is social which is to say all but
one or two
and maybe all of them has male hierarchy
for sure
and it plays by some of the rules that
you're talking about and no baboons
don't have cars but they have other
indicators of status right
but females also have hierarchy and the
thing that's super different about
modern humans
is that we are playing together in the
same space
men and women and having to create a
mixed sex hierarchy
so there's you know in baboons which
have been just studied
terrifically but also invertebrate
monkeys also in scrum like also in every
other primate society
there's male hierarchy with dominance
and different ways to attain rank and
there's female hierarchy with dominance
and different ways to attain rank
it's the mixing that makes it actually
pretty complicated
and um and it shouldn't be surprising to
us
that because because men have had the
political power
you know have had more of the power
outside of the home which is the more
public facing domain
that in order to mix the hierarchies
uh women are finding it somewhat
necessary to act in ways that look a bit
more like
male hierarchy male dominance attainment
now let's take that and ask a really
naughty question
so in really trying to understand this
so i think
um it's going to be important to hear
what you think are immutable
and i will give you one that so
i had um lisa feldman barrett on the
show and she has a great line when
talking about nature and nurture which
is like my obsession i can't tell you
how much i'm into this
and she said look tom stop trying to
untangle them she said we have a nature
that requires nurture so the brain is
like
waiting for this feedback so if you
don't cuddle a child love a child pay
attention to a child
it doesn't grow up developmentally
correct and it will be
broken in profound and just
gut-wrenching ways
so she said you really have to stop
seeing the two as these separate
entities
and recognizing the interplay so
i get that what i'm about to say i
actually have no idea if you can
like pull these things apart in my life
it has been in my marriage for the first
like eight years of my marriage my wife
was a traditional housewife
she facilitated my business career but
stayed at home she cooked for me clean
put out my clothes
like all of it and in those years
my wife worked through me she was not
inert
she wielded tremendous influence
on me the way that she would
respond to me with praise or all of the
feminine wiles that one has
and that notion of behind every powerful
man is a powerful woman i was like that
is so true
like people don't understand how much my
wife is shaping me and how much she's
pushing me to do certain things to climb
and and truly
my wife has played a not insignificant
role in my ambition
in in cultivating that and pushing that
okay i say that
because when i think of possibly
an immutable characteristic of women
being that they use
ideas that they use relationships that
that's their
their weapons is is a very misleading
word but like if a guy sort of takes
confrontation on frontally
women are far more relationship oriented
in how they move pieces around to
chessboard
yeah and when i think about what's
happening in society right now this
feels like a big
mind game like people are [__] with
the mind and so it's like
is this a very um useful female strategy
being played out at the societal level
oh god god there's like eight questions
in there
the final one was the one i was really
trying to build towards now what you
have to give me in order to answer that
that's a whole other thing
so the final one being is this a giant
chess game um that effectively uses
uh more traditional female
tools than a more traditional male
toolkit as it were
correct um yeah i think so
actually and i think you know this this
thing that people say that you know the
future is female
and oh it's testosterone that is the
problem with you know various power
structures you know
i don't i don't buy this i find it
divisive and dangerous
but is it true that an entirely male
power structure
has a tendency to go off the rails in a
particular way with which we're well
familiar from like all of history
yeah of course right um would an
all-female power structure go off the
rails in a particular way that we're
less familiar with from history
a hundred percent i don't want to see
that anymore than i want to see
you know another world war ii which is
more evocative of a typical power
structure that went off the rails
in part i think because they were there
were very few things tempering
a more male typical style of leadership
and seeing relationships in the world
so we we can do this together there is
very little precedent
um at you know there's no precedent for
how many billion people are on the
planet at this point you know
we are we are now acting globally at
every scale so
we can't get it wrong given the the
actual weapons that are at our disposal
but
the idea that we can pivot from a
almost entirely male you know
forward-facing outward-facing
power dynamic in the world to this other
thing that people are calling for an
entirely
female um way no it's going to be
it's going to be dangerous and there's
very little history and so it will in in
some ways be more dangerous it would be
in some ways more dangerous at first
because there's
there's experimentation that would be
happening in real time
and frankly some of the conversation
that i
that i hear from you know again it's a
mix of activists who were just confused
and some some good faith people who
really believe this and
some people who um just want power for
themselves just want to reverse power
and we see this across all of these all
of these current um culture war fights
um but the idea that
women in power is the solution is
ridiculous and the idea that
men resting power back from women and
taking it all back for themselves and
going back to some mad men era
looking thing is also ridiculous and
that doesn't mean it's a clear way
forward
that doesn't mean that it's going to be
easy and that
we should pretend that we can all just
you know in work be unsexed
and then you know and go home to our
private lives and have whatever sexual
relationships
you know with undertones with
undercurrents there are no it's not
possible
so one thing you know one thing that's
illegitimate in what is being
claimed in the current moment i would
say is the idea that
women i mean this is actually i was i've
been reading the badness of crowds so
douglas murray's book um
and you know his point about
about women in part is
there was a claim being made that we are
exactly the same exactly as good
as men and yet also somehow better right
it and when you put it that way and this
this is one of his his
geniuses uh you go ah yes well
that that is exactly that is exactly the
problem no we
we are different and in some ways
women are better at at a population
level at seeing some kinds of problems
than men are
and men are also better at a population
level at seeing some kinds of things
than women are and there will be some
men who may be better than any women
currently alive at whatever those female
typical things are
and vice versa right so you know this
doesn't say
anything about the limitations of you or
me
as a man or a woman listening to this
speaking this right
this is about population level
differences and then saying okay
can we extrapolate then to
what it is that you know you you as a
little girl you as little boy should be
aspiring to
no can we extrapolate to what does it
mean
when given full freedom of choice
boys are more likely to choose jobs that
allow them to work with
things and numbers and given full free
choice
girls are more likely to choose jobs
that allow them to work
with people and relationships right
that's
that's the thing with with full free
choice we still see those differences
and that difference does not inherently
suggest patriarchy or oppression
or misogyny or sexism or any of it
it might but i see very little evidence
for that
in the modern era frankly
so that's a great annunciation of
one of the often talked about sort of
immutable
characteristics of men and women and and
i i i will take it
um as self-evident that you very much
agree that for the most part we overlap
and we're really talking sort of about
at a population level or at the edges
um and so i just want to say that so for
anybody
um building a case against your
argumentation that that be stated
um now one thing i'm curious about are
there other
immutable characteristics or or maybe
immutable is the wrong word that
that are um just so
correlated caused by i'm not sure what
the right word is but that
that we would expect to see so if you
have men go for things women go for
people
are there other things yeah um
so one of my one of my favorite this is
this is not from weird countries but one
of my favorite pieces of research that i
talk about
uh when i'm talking about sex
differences is a review
of the work that men versus women do in
across 50 pre-industrial cultures so
it's work that was published in 1973
so from cultural anthropo
anthropological work from before that
um at the moment you know in 2020 when
we're talking it's
really hard to find really any
hunter-gatherer people for instance that
aren't affected
by by the modern world but in 1973 it
still was and they were looking at
at research that had been done um
throughout the 20th century with you
know
i can make all the caveats about a lot
of ethnography wasn't done very well
um and it was done with sort of a
culturally imperialist attitude
sometimes
but put all that aside and imagine that
all of the error was hopefully somewhat
random and not
systematic in terms of looking at
for they looked at 185 activities these
people who were viewing all the
anthropological literature
from you know weaving to water getting
to um basketball basket making
to fishing to hunting of large marine
mammals to iron smelting right
to gardening and for these 50 cultures
they said okay
um is it a male-only activity is it a
female-only activity
is it really whoever ends up at the
place where they need to do the thing
or is it mostly male or is it mostly
female so they sort of you know this
this scale
of you know how gendered is the activity
and if it's gendered which gender does
it
there is and of course it excludes the
things that are anatomically and
physiologically mandated we're not
talking about gestation we're not
talking about lactation right but
gestation and lactation are exactly the
things that end up
causing these sex differences at the
behavioral and the cultural level to
sort of cascade right that if you are
you know eight months pregnant or have a
three-month-old baby
who is not weaned because
three-month-old baby shouldn't be weaned
yet
um it is not a good idea for you to be
going out
on the open ocean hunting whales right
like that's not something
that women are going to want to do is
that could be
good for them they're going to put the
other people at risk you know all of
these things
so sure enough there are a few
activities
uh that these researchers found that are
just exclusively male
like hunting of large marine mammals
iron smelting
these things you know smelting of oars
these things are male activities in all
of these prisons
is it stuff specifically to do with high
risk of
death that's what it looks like to me
and that you know the analysis
it's hard to do the analysis to know the
answer to that for sure
but high risk and um and also you know
high it's not that women aren't
strong but having like high burst
strength
right like being able to move really
quickly as soon as you need to
and you know women have that but not at
all points of our reproductive cycle
right like you know when you're pregnant
when when you're when you've got a baby
on the breast
you can't do that as much so are there
things that are not anatomically and
physiologically mandated
that are really female only gendered
across all cultures
kind of not like there are things that
are that are
in most cultures that have been looked
at more likely to be
women's activities things like um
cooking of vegetable foods
and gathering of vegetable foods right
whereas cooking of animal
meat uh is is more likely to be male so
i mean we see this in our backyards
right
that's so true i literally never thought
of this why
well um you know i think and again this
is not part of part of this research but
because men are mostly doing the large
game hunting
and you know women in hunter-gatherer
societies this is going to be this is
going to vary across what kind of
ecosystem you're in and such but
women are doing small game hunting but
men are doing large game hunting and you
basically need to butcher and prepare to
some degree
in order to get the thing home because
you don't hunt the thing right next to
where you live
and so in order to to get it home in
such a way that it's not already rotten
uh you probably have to be skilled at
doing some of the prep
out in the field and you know once once
they have those skills that get them
home
and um and you know it also then is a is
status
and you know this plays out differently
in different cultures but um
you know who who actually uh did the
killing gets to decide in some cultures
to what degree the meat gets distributed
and to who and sometimes the meat gets
attributed to the females of the family
and sometimes it gets distributed to the
men and you know all of these things are
variable
and it would be it would be ridiculous
to say oh in those cultures where the
men distribute the meat to men
that's the patriarchy because there are
other cultures where the men distribute
the meat to women
and the fact is that families feed each
other right no matter you know no matter
how
how it works within family units
it doesn't it no family units that
persist
into the future starve out one of the
sexes
and that's not to say that there haven't
been terrible you know terrible
instances
of babies right babies of one sex or
another being preferred
but once we're talking about adults you
know women women get meat and men get
meat and how it gets distributed varies
by culture and that's you know that's
interesting
but um one last thing about this this
piece of research that i think is
fascinating is
there are a lot of highly gendered
activities like
um well i didn't pull it up and for this
um
i think like uh i think basket weaving
is one of them
and loomwork that are oh and ceramics
pottery making
that are highly gendered but it depends
on what culture you're in which gender
it is
and so there is utility so there's
utility
in having an activity be like okay
that's man's work or that's woman's work
but there's nothing inherent about the
activity that makes it more
more likely that men or women should be
doing it there's nothing in our brains
or our bodies that are
differently capable of working with clay
or with fabric or with or the yarn
but there does seem to be some utility
across almost every culture looked at
such as other than weird cultures where
we're just mixing it up and we're all
doing to some degree all of the work if
we want to
of saying okay that thing is man's
domain that thing is woman's domain and
you therefore know if you're doing that
thing
you know what sex you are and if you're
holding that thing you know
you know something about the person who
made it so you know there's there's sort
of cultural meaning
there's something here that i i don't
understand so
um why would it become
gendered like why would the society who
i'm sure isn't sitting down
you know with like uh a council saying
all right we should gender this stuff
you know what do we
do where it just sort of comes out why
would you gender something
why like if if if across cultures we see
men can basket weave women can basket
weave then why do cultures
gender it yeah so so another way of
asking that question would be
what is the value of division of labor
right like why
why do we have this specifically by sex
well
um i would say because it is this
category sex
you know almost nothing about what the
differences between men and women
are are what i would call immutable but
sex
is right like sex is ancient it's
hundreds of millions of years old
and um and that you know intersex exists
you know all of that we can go into all
the caveats but the fact is the vast
vast vast majority of human beings who
have ever lived
are male or female and the gender roles
that come from that is to say the
behavioral manifestations of sex
are something that are also um also
old within cultures and so
there are often also division of labor
between
age groups right like so old people in
some cultures do the child care
leaving the able-bodied parents of young
children to do the more physically
demanding labor
so that you can you can argue with
regard to that
okay in fact i just i just gave you an
example that looked like
well it's because older people can't do
the physically demanding labor so
they're going to do the parenting
that then when their children grow up to
become grandparents they
you know they will do the parenting why
divide things by sex when there's
nothing mandating it at the biological
level because it is
a a category that is real and division
of labor is valuable
and division of labor is not inherently
divisive or oppressive i mean i think
that's
that's maybe the the key point for me
here
is that just because you have difference
just because you have
division of labor even if that
difference is
somehow brought about by cultural norms
and enforced by cultural norms
that does not mean that the work is
either better
or worse based on what sex you are or
what group is doing it
often you get this overlay often i would
say it's afterwards of ah
well then that's woman's work therefore
we're not going to value that as much
therefore to some degree you know the
economic model
that um that reveals the work that is
more outward facing is going to pay more
and so women's work is literally
devalued because it's not paid as much
right but that i would say is a later
overlay
that the value of division of labor is
actually far older than anything having
to do
with oppression or patriarchy or any of
these
you know modern lenses through which we
tend to be viewing gender roles
so there's two ways to look at that
you've got
the notion of categories being very
useful and i want to talk about
that in a minute um and then you also
have uh
which to me seems uh a necessary
question to ask which is
how much of this has to do with the act
of sex complicating things
or that you begin to create different
norms or ways of communicating
so for instance um this is i've never
articulated these things out loud so
bear with me as i sort of fumble through
this but
um i have worked in groups that were
exclusively men
and i've worked in groups that were
mixed
it is much easier to work in groups that
are
exclusively men for me as a guy but it
is more productive to work in mixed
groups because you get
heterogeneity of ideas and it's it's
just
we'll talk about the friction of that in
a minute which goes back to this notion
of categories which are useful and i
think
anyway we'll get to that in a minute but
um the
ease with which you can communicate
because you can come up with rules of
engagement
very very easily among guys where it's
like look
i'm gonna call you a [__] an idiot a
[__] whatever just go [__] do it
i'm not gonna worry about your feelings
the number of times where i've had
because my wife and i are business
partners
yeah and the number of times where i've
like i don't have the [__] time right
now to think about your feelings
and and she like gets it but i don't
like i don't value my way of doing that
like when i do that to her i'm like ugh
like because i get from her perspective
that's not
helpful or useful and yet i'm like oh
but when
when you're with guys in my life modern
context i have no idea how much of this
is innate
but it's just easier in my experience
to come up with rules of engagement how
much of that do you think is playing
a role in the fact that ah whoever does
basket weaving doesn't matter but we're
going to isolate it it's going to be all
men are all women
yeah no i think that's huge i think
that's a tremendously apt observation
and just like i said you know primates
have been doing this these separate
social hierarchies
for tens of millions over 100 million
years
and here we are mixing it up mixing it
up between the sexes and pretending
that it's no biggie and of course it is
of course it's going to be tough of
course there are going to be challenges
and you know also it is true that
um because men are bigger and more
powerful
on average women tend to use power that
is more covert
um and that goes around behind and
and uses language and whispers and
and such and that is harder to shut down
than the traditional male kinds of power
traditional male kinds of power when it
hap you know what happens in front of
you you're like wow
dude that wasn't okay you can't do that
and
it's because precisely because um
women's kinds of power has been less
obvious
it's harder to point to and it's harder
to shut down and we really ought to be
you know looking to shut down all of the
illegitimate uses of
traditionally gendered power of any sort
when we come together to try to work
together and um you know the thing that
you said about
all male teams are easier to work with
but the mixed sex teams
are more productive that is that's
beautiful and
um i have i have an anecdote that isn't
exactly analogous to that but i think
also we'll add something here which is i
used to play ultimate frisbee a
tremendous amount
and um you ruptured your achilles heel
oh i know this story
yes yes um and i was i mean i played i
actually played on the
traveling team at university of michigan
when i was in grad school there
and um and i and i captained a lot of
summer league teams so like i
really for a while was playing you know
practically every day for
several years and i loved it
and i went to a lot of tournaments where
i got to watch all men's
you know men's games and i played on a
women's team and then i captained a lot
of co-ed teams and played pickup with a
lot of
in a lot of co-ed situations and
watching a men's game
was not all that interesting i love
watching male athletes but it just
wasn't all that interesting because
these long
ultimate frisbee is um kind of
like i don't know what it's like it's
kind of like soccer but with a frisbee
like you can't
that's i don't even know what it's like
but for those who don't know you're
trying to move a frisbee down the field
to the end zone and the the all men's
games tended to be
a long hawk with a long run into the end
zone and a catch and these points were
brief
and there was glory for like two people
and the rest of the players like
okay i didn't get to play right and the
all women's games either when i was
playing them
or watching them by contrast i found
relatively uninteresting for like the
opposite reason
they were more careful and you know
these are athletes like we are we are
skilled athletes we're not
you know we're not wall flowers we're
not unable to handle the disc but
there were very few long hucks and like
i like a long hawk i like to run for
them
but there was a whole lot of short
passes and also just like you say
a a tendency to try to make sure that
everyone handled the disc
right like that everyone gets play and
that's
great in a pickup game but when you're
in competition that's actually not what
you're supposed to be doing
whereas the the co-ed teams for me
anyway
had this mixture of both so you had
coming from sort of the female side
an impulse to actually not not never
throw it to
those two people because they might be
more likely to drop the disc but
actually there are teammates and we're
all playing this game together
and what are you trying to do just win
or actually have a good
a good game for everyone and there was
the sort of the pressure coming from the
men
like okay let's make it faster let's
throw it long let's get some high energy
let's get really excited when we do this
and you know celebrate the guy or the
woman
who caught the pass in the end zone and
had to lay out so you know you have both
of those things coming together
in a single team and uh and it was it
was beautiful
and yet there was never any pretense
that we weren't different
right so on a just one more thing about
ultimate um
you know it's seven people on a side and
on a co-ed team
you always tried to match the sex ratio
because if you had four
three on one side if you had four guys
and three women
on one side and five two on the other
who's the woman
who's playing against the guy on the
other side and you ever
ever you you line up i mean you don't
always but like you line up against who
you're going to be
defending against and the guy a can see
that he's going to be up against a woman
and so that affects how he views himself
and the woman can see okay i'm up
against this guy and maybe he's the
slowest guy on the team but he's still a
guy he's still going to have better you
know higher burst speed probably
and he's probably a little taller than
me and so can reach higher and you know
there's going to be differences
that aren't inherently true for all
individual men versus
individual women but at a population
level men are faster men are taller men
are stronger men have higher birth speed
all of these things
so um the mixed teams in ultimate
were amazing to play in and we never
ever ever pretended that there were
differences between us
and i mean i think that's what we're
shooting for in in life
right yeah see that to me brings this
to where i would love to see the
conversation get where it's not
pathological and people can
get to what is useful so my obsession in
life is what is useful
you have a goal and what's the thing
that moves you to that goal and so i
just always default to that
now we can talk if you have a goal
that's pathological now we've got a
whole different problem but
once somebody can clearly articulate
this is my goal then use the scientific
method to go well
is this thing you're doing getting you
to that goal or not it's what i call the
physics of progress
and there just there is a nature to
getting closer to a goal you try
something did it work yes or no you look
at the data you're honest about it and
then you try again now more
intelligently
and one of the things that seems when i
think about out of society going to a
place that leads to more fulfillment
for everybody okay so that's my goal i
want fulfillment not
not just momentary happiness but like
deep profound fulfillment doing hard
things
to serve not only yourself but to serve
the collective as well
okay so that's what we're aiming at
what's going to be the thing that gets
us there
categories seems to be a very useful
part of that and the reason for me is um
i read a study or
heard and read an article somewhere that
basically said there's there are
cultures
that can't see certain shades of blue
because they don't have a concept
for it they don't have a name for that
color blue and therefore you just try to
take all the different shades that you
see and crush them into the
the same little boxes like us and snow
right yeah it's snow
maybe we have hail sleet snow but that's
sort of it and then you hear the joke
whether it's true or not i don't know
the eskimos you know have 300 words for
snow because there's so many different
types and textures and therefore they're
able to discern between those things
okay i read this book called rocket fuel
in the book rocket fuel it talks about
how
you actually for a company to be
successful you need two
types of leader you need one that's a
visionary and then you need one that can
execute on the vision
and the book hypothesizes it's actually
very rare that one person can do both
and so you need this sort of dynamic duo
and
one of the ones that they give is a
great example is disney you had walt
disney
visionary you had roy disney the one
dealing with the banks and making sure
that they could actually pay for things
and if you read the biography on walt
disney
you realize whoa without roy this never
would have gone anywhere
so now when i think of men and women as
categories i think it's actually pretty
important
to be able to figure out like what these
categories are
so that we can find this what i call the
productive
friction so in a business like my wife
for instance is the executor i'm the
visionary
and i have worked with partners in the
past that had that same dynamic
but they resented each other and i
remember watching it going this doesn't
make sense
like you're both extraordinary people
but until you understand and you and
brett actually talked about this if the
bird thinks that the wind is holding it
back from flying faster
and imagines that it will fly faster in
a vacuum but in reality of course that
bird will
plummet to the ground that's what i'm
talking about so to me
men and women as categories the the
friction of
thinking differently of approaching the
world differently of
saying in this case to my wife as a
business runner
even though i don't pick up on the
things you pick up on and honestly
sometimes i find them very frustrating
because they slow me down or whatever
i acknowledge that if it is just it like
if i were to indoctrinate everybody on
the team or only hire people that think
like me
we won't get as far as if you and i
acknowledge that the friction between
our world views and the way that we
approach things creates a healthier
company
and so while we at times get frustrated
with each other
in recognizing that we are different in
recognizing and putting a finger on
these are the ways in which we are
different and now we
understand why that's valuable
we're able to make more progress and so
when i see people trying to
no there is no difference i'm like whoa
you're you're getting rid of these
categories of usefulness
yeah now i i think i think there's a lot
true there
the one thing and i've heard you talk
about before about the sort of
difference between the visionary and
what was the second category that you
called it the executor
the the executor yeah somebody who who
the operations officer is usually the
role it becomes
there it is okay so like the operations
officer versus the um the visionary
the one the one way that i
hesitate about endorsing this this view
is that because it's a dichotomy because
it's a binary
um it would appear to map onto the male
female
dichotomy and um and
something very deep in me resists that
quite strongly and that's not to say
that
um for instance i think our modern
understanding of things like executive
function
of being able to you know organize and
schedule and plan and sort of think into
the future and figure out well if this
is happening thursday then this other
thing can't happen until friday
is i think more likely to be
highly capable in the minds of more
women than than than men
right um but and in fact there's some
there's some really interesting research
um that calls this um detail versus just
and finds indeed that women are more
able across a lot of domains
to do detailed details sort of work and
men just sort of work and so that
that seems again like a little bit of a
map for what you're talking about sort
of
um operations officer versus visionary
just so you know and i don't know if it
matters i don't map them that way
yeah no i i i hear you not mapping it
that way and i and i appreciate that i
think
i think others will and i think
um that is part of the legitimate push
back that we are seeing in society from
people who then go on to make
extraordinary and ridiculous claims
about there being no differences
because will will the visionary nature
of women
tend to look different from the
visionary nature of men tend to
yeah it probably will and will some well
some female visionaries have
visionary natures that look very much
like male visionaries have in the past
yes but it's more likely that it will
come looking a little bit different
and will therefore be a bit harder to
recognize perhaps
by a cultural and economic system that
has made it more difficult for women
visionaries to
to have their visions be be revealed and
i also suspect that um
so there's this result that i haven't
been able to track down but i used to
report out on a lot i
i hope still stands uh which is so we
have we have
a left and a right brain right so we
have we have a
cerebral cortex that is bigger in
primates than any other mammals and
bigger in humans than any other primates
and it's where our memory happens and
our reflection on the past and our
imagining of what's going to happen in
the future in our analysis and our
abstraction
and it's they're split between left and
right but we have this band of fibers
the corpus callosum that connects them
and so you can ask and it's a question
that i find endlessly fascinating so you
know what's
what's the advantage of splitting it in
the first place and then what's the
advantage of reconnecting it like
if if you wanted it reconnected why did
it split in the first place well
sometimes you want to hide some things
from yourself you want to be able to do
something over here
that this part of your brain needs to
just like keep walking or something and
that's a ridiculous example but that you
know you don't want to be disturbed by
and women are one of the demographics
that actually have a larger corpus
callosum
um and so it's they're also um
if memory serves and again i haven't
been able to find this research so i
hope i'm not wrong but it's women
it's homosexuals and it's also
left-handers so have a larger corpus
callosum
than men straight people and
right-handers
so is having a big corpus callosum good
well that's like asking is being male
good is it better
no under some circumstances yes so you
know what kind of work do you want to do
that actually makes the connections that
connects all the parts
that's going to be part of what at just
a gross neurological level your corpus
callosum is for
what kind of work do you want to be able
to do where you dive deep and you
unitask
and you are not at all disruptable even
by the people who want to be disrupting
you to tell you that your house is on
fire or whatever it is
well there are times when that's going
to be the better thing right so
you know which is the evolut the naive
evolutionary question which of these
things is better
is exactly that it's naive so you know
is
is a male style of being more likely to
be
able to be focused to be hypertuned to
one thing
to emerge days weeks months years later
saying aha
eureka moment i've got it probably
but that doesn't mean that it's not
totally possible within
you know within women as well well this
this is really interesting um and that
gets to the article that you wrote about
toxic femininity
and how if we're going to talk about
toxic masculinity then we have to
be willing to look at the flip side of
that coin jordan peterson also talks
about that
in a way that i find very interesting
which is look um
sort of the male way of being when taken
to the extreme becomes tyranny and the
female way of being when taken to a
extreme becomes chaos and i thought
that's
really interesting i don't know how you
feel about that before you answer that
i will say um one of the things i love
about conversation is
you show me how i'm coming across versus
what i think
i'm presenting so on the um the
dichotomy between a visionary and an
executor i actually don't think that has
anything to do with sex
i think you're gonna find that there are
let's say it's equally distributed 50
50.
you're going to get 50 of women are
visionaries 50 are executors 50
of men or visionaries 50 or executors
even though and i have no reason to
believe that's actually true i'm just
saying right
my experience is not borne out that
that's a male female divide
only that it is a category and the
category is useful
and that i think that there is similarly
the categories of male and female are
useful and so what you're just saying
here is a true statement about my life
i i much like you and brett got together
very young
lisa and i got to gather very young and
i
don't know who i would be without lisa
and when i think about from an
evolutionary standpoint
evolution just saying oh we're these two
sexes
are going to co-evolve and so they're
going to influence each other i'm
and nature blind watchmaker totally buy
into that but just
for way of analogies so people get where
i'm going here
if you think of nature as saying i'm not
interested in these species or sorry
these sexes in isolation
i'm not going to design them in
isolation i am going to design you
entirely assuming that the other one is
there
and so now if you strip away those
categories it sort of breaks
how we've come together and going back
to that sort of magic friction of
it is in the difference that the magic
happens and that once
if culturally we try to beat the
difference out
it will actually cause problems
yeah no i i absolutely agree with that i
um
it is it's not only a denial of the real
differences
um but that denial is itself going to
cause giant problems exactly as you say
um
to your point about what jordan peterson
said i have not heard that before so i'm
a big fan of him
of his work excuse me um but what you
said was
basically male power taken to its
extreme tends to tyranny
and female power taken to is its extreme
tends to chaos that's what you reported
that he said
yeah so the the way that he so
me putting words in jordan's mouth is a
very dangerous game when i say that that
man is magnitude smarter than i am
whoa um so i will say
in his book um the 12 rules for life i
think the subheading is an antidote to
chaos now if you've read maps of
meaning and you get where he's going
in terms of the female
being essentially nature itself
because it leverages sexual selection
and that the
male must do things to please the female
in order to have their
you know progeny move forward um and i
forget the exact reason why
he refers to oh it's it's the unknown
so chaos to him is the unknown
not oh they're all over the place just
that there is
this sense of the new the unknown that
you must sort of venture out into and
there's and i'm doing a terrible job of
explaining this so i really wish
he could speak for himself here um but
that notion of
nature itself being the element of chaos
of you of change um
so we we should we should have him in
this conversation right
yeah question uh so i'm gonna i will try
i'm gonna try to respond without
responding to
what he may have may have said
i i have heard so many renderings of
what he's said by other people
and i know you're not trying to do this
but in which people intentionally
misrepresent him and he comes across as
some misogynistic crank and he's not
you know he's he's neither he totally
agrees what he says in the book is
it feels so right and doesn't feel
disparaging in either direction
yeah so i have not um truth in
advertising here i've i've not read maps
of meaning i have read 12 rules
um and i've spent a little bit of time
with with the man myself and with his
wife
and um they're both just you know
wonderful people before before all of
the
current unfortunate medical problems
they've been having
um at first pass
the idea of male power taken to its
extreme leads to tyranny
would appear to be borne out by history
but it's not clear to me that that's the
only way it can go
and female power taken to this extreme
leads to chaos
that that doesn't quite that i can't
quite make that match
what i what i think would happen
i think um you know we haven't seen an
entirely female powered system
um but i think it would just as equally
lead to territy
and it might in some ways do so faster
precisely because the kinds of ways
that women have been able to affect
change in the world have been more
covert
and so um there would be more covert
ways to
um to change rules in a
in a purely in a purely female system i
honestly i can't even
i can't even quite imagine what it looks
like but i think unfortunately
unchecked power of any sort male
female any other sort that we might want
to categorize it as
will ultimately lead to to tyranny um so
maybe i'll just stop there rather than
dig a hole trying to
try trying to guess at what what he
meant because my
my impression is even worse trying to
guess at what he meant
after hearing me bastardize it and
describe it probably wildly incorrectly
um but it is interesting to think about
what
um female tyranny
would look like and the reason i asked
my earlier question about do you think
what we're seeing now
is basically that that's my hunch in
in no way disparaging women whenever
something goes
the you know my thing is the friction us
working together with good faith like
that's the magic the magic is
is recognizing oh i could go wrong
as much as it all feels right like every
time i'm in the middle of
you know doing something that i just
have all this like massive certainty and
conviction about
i'm always checking myself with hey it
always feels right until like the [__]
hits the fan and you realize whoa
i've been going the wrong way for a
terrifyingly long amount of time
so i'm so i'm always so skeptical of
that that i want the checks and balances
but having said that and and i will
assume the same is
is true on the female side there's no
ill intent i don't i don't think
on mass i don't think that there's
anybody trying to do anything wrong
but it's like and this will be
interesting i have never thought this
before or said this out loud i'm merely
thinking of this in real time and i've
heard you speak very warmly of people
that are willing to sort of risk
you know looking stupid by floating
something when it's early stages
caveat caveat caveat um but
when i think of communism that feels
more
feminine to me like hey everybody should
get the frisbee for an equal amount of
time everybody should feel good about
you know
playing like i get it where is that has
not borne out when you get like a
masculine group which is
the sort of tyrannical i get all the
women and you get nothing i get all the
money and you get nothing right so
i'm not pitching either as a good idea
right um
but the the covert to use your words was
i think is very apt
movements that we're seeing now where
it's like you can tear somebody down
they they later got sort of proven
innocent but ah nobody pays attention to
that headline right that headline didn't
get
any news and there's what they call
whisper networks in the comic book
industry where it's like so
which by the way we have to talk about
you write science fiction i don't want
to derail where we're going right now
but i'm so keen
to hear more about that but you hear
about these whisper networks where
people are trying to erode somebody's
credibility
that feels distinctly feminine to me
yes um yeah i think uh you know how do
you erode
status in a male hierarchy
it tends to be right out in the open
like every everyone knows
that uh dude a has come to dude b and
said
you know i want your position and i'm
going to tell you that and we're going
to do it and if it's again if it's
baboons it tends to be about
fighting you know it tends to involve
teeth and biting and
people don't do it that way but um you
know we we have other tools we have
other weapons or tools and
um you know it's it is notable
that women don't engage in physical
fights in the same way and when
and when we do you know that is we have
special words for it right like it's a
cat fight it's it's a different sort of
thing so
how is it that the changes in status
happen it's it's not
it's not by those same rules which also
means that
it's just this this won't be easy it
won't be
easy to have say a team of eight people
in which you know half-ish are men and
half-ish are women
and all are ambitious and hard-charging
and
beyond competent and super smart and
have different things they bring to the
table
and also the men have a
way of going about things that is going
to be more direct
and that will sometimes be more likely
to hurt the feelings of the women at the
table
and the women are going to are more
likely to couch things in terms of well
i think or don't you think that
or would it be okay if and those kinds
of
even even just linguistic couchings
make it easier for the women to be
ignored by the men when they're like
focused on a thing oh well she just
asked if i could but i can't
like no actually i was telling you you
needed to and that was just my way of
saying it because
this sort of morph this female way of
interacting is
maybe more likely to be thinking about
your feelings and actually
i'm not supposed to be thinking about
your feelings i just needed to say it
but you know both of us
you know both of us all of us need to
somehow be engaging
with okay there's not just there's not
just the one way of interacting right
now
and i mean i think what you said earlier
is just exactly right and i've never
heard anyone say it before
which is that when you have been on all
male teams it's easier
and when you've been on mixed sex teams
uh it's more productive
and you know i just i so hope that
anecdote holds
across everything it's what i'm sort of
banking on
and then then the thing is
how do we make the more productive thing
which is actually more
fair and allows for everyone not just
half the population to
actually come to come into our own in
whatever way it is that we want to be
creative analytical
productive healing in the world do so
with as little friction as possible like
how do we do it
how do we do it heather i asked you
well i i actually have ideas so running
a business
you find that you have to navigate this
um you have to find a way so
i i am again my obsession the only thing
i think about
is i have a goal now if my goal is
exciting
and honorable then everybody should be
cool with me going
hard after that goal now if it's not
honorable then okay cool i get it
but my goal is fulfillment
for as as many human beings is
absolutely possible and
when i think about how we get there
i need to be able to hire the best
person for
the job right so whatever and obviously
the way i'm trying to get there
is as a media company so putting out
ideas
uh which my audience probably has heard
me say this a bazillion times but so you
sort of get a sense of where i'm headed
um i when i was like 19 i ended up big
brothering this kid in the inner cities
for
eight years and it was it planted a seed
as the only true answer i was too young
to sort of make sense of
it and to understand like what the hell
is going on um
and then 15 years later i end up having
3 000 employees
a thousand of them grew up just like
this kid in the inner cities
with a broken mindset so to me
it it seems in this you want to talk
about controversial positions it seems
self-evident to me
that poverty is a mindset there's
nothing genetic about it
so if you took a kid that was about to
grow up in poverty and it will
destroy his mindset and he or she will
think in a way that is
not useful and you put them in a place
where
um affluence is sort of the norm then
they'll grow up with a mindset
towards that jeffrey canada i think sums
it up the best he said the biggest
difference between inner city kids and
kids who grow up middle class is the
number of words they hear by the age of
five and the ratio of positive to
negative he's like is that simple
it just it does something to the
communication circuitry of your brain
which will be so
required for you to be successful later
in life okay so
i'm looking at that and i'm saying all
right fulfillment's my goal
how do i help these people think in a
certain way and the punch line becomes
to build this media company all right
i really believe in that i think it's
honorable i think it definitely excites
me
and now if you're saying if if i
pull it off then you know there's not
only personal glory but it has this
positive impact in the world but if i
fail i go to business
so now i'm just like okay i need the
best people for the job i could not care
less
what they look like whether they're a
male or female none of that matters
are they going to help me to that thing
so now it's like well
if i know i'm going to have a mixed
group because mixed groups give you the
best outcomes in terms of being
productive
and that i'm willing to sort of couch
the ease that i would get from working
you know just with people who are like
me there's this great quote in business
if you and your business partner think
of like one of you is useless
so it's like i i can't have people who
think like me i already bring that to
the table
so now it becomes a game of rules of
engagement so i've actually created a
document that says
this is how we [__] deal with things
and one of the questions that i ask
in the interview is when was the last
time you were offended
and i want to know what offends people
because i have a threshold if you're
[__] easily offended i can't deal
with you
like the odds that someone is going to
offend you whether intentionally or not
borders on 100. and so if you're dialed
to
11 on that it's going to be destructive
to the group
so the john wooden idea if i don't look
for the best players i look for the best
fit on the team and then write it down
what are your rules of engagement
oh that's good um so what you just said
you don't look for the best players
uh john wooden you don't look for the
best players you look for the best fit
on the team
so to me so i'm flipping the tables on
you a little bit here
i'm curious i i used to build teams in a
different way when i
when i was a college professor and i
would take students on study abroad so i
would i would get to know
some larger group of students and then i
would call the group
to choose the people who i thought were
mature enough capable enough
you know team players enough also yes
intellectually up to the challenge but
really that was the least important
thing
to take on some you know four six
eleven week journey through panama or
ecuador into the amazon you know really
remote places
that required that we were all we all
saw each other
as human beings worthy of respect for
whom
every single other member of the team
would actually go out of their way to
help
but at the same time i also was looking
for people who
um when they had a problem their first
question was not who do i ask for help
but how do i solve this myself right and
this you know this
there are environments when you actually
do want people to be asking for help
because that's going to increase
group cohesion right but if you are
if you're literally in the rain forest
if you're literally in the jungle
and uh you know you lose a boot um
you you know you may well need help from
other people but your first thought
shouldn't be
you know where's my professor where's
you know where's the person in charge
you know understand that you yourself
are the person in charge first
um so i'm i'm i know that my
rules to my my students in advance after
i had chosen them
from among the people who thought they
would be a good fit and said okay now we
have to create this coherent unit
i was really talking to them all as
individuals and the part about
um like who like how the team actually
came together
i kind of still black boxed i'm i'm not
sure i have
that part written down so i'm i'm
wondering what
what you understand about the dynamics
of the team itself
as different from the individuals that
you
choose to put on it like is it just
about skills i think it's probably not i
think it's about personality too
it's more about personality than it is
skill set
you explained it perfectly so you may
just have better words for exactly what
i'm doing
which is i do look at who they'll be
working with admittedly and saying like
okay are they going to get along with
these specific people
but because i am so gung-ho
about nobody feeling like all right if
you're the copywriter don't think of
yourself as a copywriter like look what
are the problems this company faces can
you help
like help anywhere that you can help and
i've
moved people around because it's like oh
you were hired for like we had this one
guy i was hired from marketing
he was this extraordinarily talented
artist and so he's now
on our art team it's just amazing um and
and
had no idea that you know that was the
skill set
so i think about who they're working
with in particular but more it's
what you're talking about the layover
test do i want to be around this person
yeah like are they fun are they
open-minded um
and then the the um the lose-a-boot
thing where it's like
are you self-directed are you
self-reliant
do you are you what i call an
unrelenting problem solver
so if you give me an unrelenting problem
solver
and say but they don't know like you
let's say you need a director of
marketing
and hey this person they don't really
know marketing but they're an
unrelenting problem solver would you
consider them
absolutely now i'd rather have somebody
who's experienced
as a director of marketing and they're
an unrelenting problem solver but if
they are
easily offended um they are
you know they hit an obstacle and they
stop but they have like
a great pedigree i'd still be like ah
like i just don't know where i'm gonna
be tomorrow business changes too
fast and so just because you're good at
something today
doesn't mean that thing will be
necessary tomorrow like so i have this
thing called impact theory university
where i teach people how to
be good at business or just normal life
and
i keep getting pressed to create like
these really narrow courses like teach a
copywriting course or teach a marketing
course
i'm like you don't understand this stuff
changes so quickly whatever i teach you
today
will cease to be interesting in six
months for sure
so i could walk somebody point by point
how i built my last company which ended
up being a billion dollar company's
crazy
nut it would seem so dumb because none
of it would work now
and so getting to the what you're
calling a black box of like
there is a lot of sort of mystery to
that but there are fundamentals
to how a person approaches like talking
to
um brett when i had him on there's no
question
if brett and i sat together long enough
i'd be like oh we actually really
disagree sort of violently
about these things but because you're so
open-minded and i just want to know
what's true
it's like we can get along so well
and so i'm always looking for people
that have that sort of openness they
want to know what's true
they're not dogmatic i'm so terrified of
dogma in my own life
that you know finding people who think
like that i'll take that all day
oh yeah so i'm reminded of another
anecdote many years ago
brett and i were hanging out with my dad
who's dead now but he was a computer
engineer
he was born in 1938 so he was an early
computer engineer
and he basically he he spoke hardware
and he spoke software
and he in large part did the interface
between the two so he was basically the
translator between the hardware guys and
the software guys
and women he had a lot of female
programmers actually that he worked with
and one of his jobs was hiring hiring
programmers and he was describing at one
point the
what he looked for in programming in in
in people who
were going to be programming for him and
you know he said a lot of the things
that you've said here and that i've said
and at some point brett said you know
aren't you forgetting something you know
they obviously need to know how to
program and he said oh no no
i can teach him to code that's not the
important thing at all
so i mean i think i think this is what
the best a
i think team leaders and you know
successful entrepreneurs and business
people are educators whether they know
it or not so they're they're
they're creating environments in which
you know
the guy that you hired into marketing
and turns out to be an amazing artist
presumably he knew that but no one else
had ever been able to see it and also
have the power to help him realize it
so that's that that is a big role that i
see as an educator like yes there is an
opening up
of horizons because you reveal things
that the person that this
would be student has never seen before
but a lot of it is
just getting out of their way like
opening opening it's like opening up a
highway being like
you can go now like you you can you can
go as far as you want
and my job is to
to show you the various off-ramps and to
see which ones you actually do a good
job on and you know your
your artist who's more an artist than a
marketer
you know that that story is is wonderful
in part two because it's clear in you
telling it
that there's nothing in you that's
saying and that's better
you know or and that choice is
inherently a better choice it's a better
choice for him
and you know this this also is the
mistake that people who naively think
about evolution make
what is best you know this is this is
the theme that i keep coming back to in
our conversation here like no
art isn't better than marketing you know
like i may have a preference for it many
people might have a preference for it
but
it is not inherently better for that
human being with
passion for and skill at art it is a
better choice for him
that does not mean that is a better
choice for every human being
some people will be better at and have
more passion for
and and skill in marketing and therefore
that's a better choice for them
totally absent any moral judgment about
marketing and art in the abstract
this may seem like a random question but
um something you said just triggered
this
one i am surprised that
you left unperturbed you'd still be a
college professor just given
that my value system which is not better
it is just different i'm so obsessed
with scale
i am so glad that you are now
doing things on the internet otherwise i
never would have encountered your mind
and the way that you think and approach
things um
what made you so good you were the um
i don't know for how many years but you
were rated the number one teacher at
evergreen before you departed
what was it that made you so good
well i i appreciate i appreciate that
um first let me respond to the first
thing you said which is
for a few years before evergreen blew up
brett and i
were were looking around going how do we
how do we scale this like is it possible
to do what we do
in these classrooms and in the field for
25 or 50 students
um because we had it was just a 25 to 1
student faculty ratio and so if you were
teaching alone you had 25 students if
you're teaching with someone else you
had 50 and you know very occasionally a
group of 75 but
that is both more students than most
people could really form relationships
with but we managed
but it's also a tiny tiny number of
people and it did feel
like as much as those jobs had such
tremendous freedom
the other the thing that they had was
such tremendous freedom with security
and it turns out the security was false
so um so what they weren't they weren't
great jobs after all but what they
allowed was
a freedom to explore uh relationship
space
with um in con in the context of
education
with like almost no resources like this
is a public liberal arts college with
almost no resources
um so it was always shoestring budgets
but like what
where can you take people that they
don't imagine was even on
option so i i
love i'm like simultaneously an extreme
introvert and i
love connecting with people and i just
loved creating these communities
where a lot of students felt i believe
and i was told by many of them
seen for the first time and we had a
tremendous number of first generation
students
students eligible for pell grants which
means very low income
students with no support from their
families non-traditional age students
veterans um just you know people who had
been
um homemakers and were now coming back
to school so you know tremendous
diversity actually
of across most of the demographics you
would expect and
put all those along with a certain
number of traditional age
you know k-12 straight to college
students in a room together and
especially take them out into the field
together
and start showing them things that are
real regardless of whether they care
or they know or they understand
regardless of what they think
you know that lizard is sitting on that
log bob in his head
because he that is a territorial display
and he is
telling males stay away this is mine and
he is trying to
lure females and that story that i just
said on top of the observation
we can talk about to what degree it's
true here and now
and the species and all but the
observation is real and enduring
and nothing that anyone else says you
know you might have a different angle on
it say
oh well he wasn't bobbing as long as you
thought he was fine
the physical reality is out there right
like the physical reality happened
history happened once regardless of our
interpretation of it
now let's come together break bread
together cook together sit around a
campfire play frisbee together right so
we're gonna do the
the intellectual stuff and it's gonna be
hard and challenging and i'm gonna tell
you things like
yeah genocide evolved and rape evolved
and they're terrible and we need to do
everything in our power
to minimize these things going forward
in human history
but pretending that they're not
evolutionary outcomes
is not going to help so let's talk about
all this difficult stuff
and you know lead you through stuff most
people don't want like i'm going to
teach a bunch of math phobe statistics
and that's going to enable you to try to
reduce the bias in your thinking
and i'm going to walk you through you
know in one quarter you're going to go
from
seeing a pattern hypothesizing why you
think it's true
creating an experimental design to try
to explain
to try to address whether or not your
hypothesis is true collect the data
analyze the data the statistics i taught
you
write up a report which references the
primary literature and
speak that speak your research to the
class like an entire
the entire actual gamut of scientific
research
which frankly even a lot of people with
phds don't end up doing because they
walk into someone's lab and they get
handed a little piece
they get they get told ah this is the
question we're working on
um you're gonna collect these data and
then we're gonna talk about what it
means
so i had i assumed i assumed that my 18
year olds and my 25 year olds and my 30
year old students
were totally capable and a few of them
weren't it turns out or
just not in that time or not with me or
whatever but the vast majority of them
could 100 do it could rise to the
challenge and the idea that you know
what
this is day one at the end of week 10
you're all going to have done a complete
piece of research
most of it will have failed most of it
will be banal most of it won't matter
but you will have done a complete piece
of research and you will have that
forever after you will be able to see
and know and go i did that well [__]
if i did that who knows what else i can
do
so that that's part of that that's
that's so powerful
so um given the work that i have done so
in manufacturing you end up in the inner
cities a lot and then
now that i sort of go around speaking um
there's my message is look i used to be
um i would go home every night from my
remedial job and i would lay on the
floor
of a cheap unfurnished apartment i could
i can still remember
how it felt and what it looked like to
have the cheap nylon carpet like
pressing against my face and when you
get up and it like leaves little marks
because i was just like what am i doing
with my life
and so my story is one of going from
sort of broken hopeless
lost afraid to oh actually like from an
evolutionary lens if you think about the
brain you understand why
you have a negative voice you understand
how you can like use it as a habit loop
trigger like there's just these things
that you can do
that then prime you to be an unrelenting
problem solver
to understand how the acquisition of
skills works to understand that the
human animal has chosen a strategy of
letting culture
influence it so basically it can learn
and grow and adapt
even you know after it's born even after
it's an adult it's like
so cool hey take this like and now go do
your thing and so
the the kinds of people that that um are
drawn to that message it's really
interesting and the thing that i'm
always trying to get them to do is what
you just talked about which is
just try the [__] you're going to blow
yourself away if you go do something i
know you don't think you can
i get it you have a view of yourself
you're me
lost scared broken uh just convinced
that you're not good enough smart enough
whatever
but if you go do it like it can be such
an intense paradigm shift for people
yeah and
just getting people to take that first
bit of action
um and you've talked a lot about
helicopter parenting
and i feel like oh my god that we're
living through this nightmare of people
are so afraid to try things they
actually
conflate language with violence right
you're never going to try anything
like that that's a level of like
paranoia so
if i were to have let's say taken one of
your kids who i know you did not raise
this way
but i took them when they were very
young and i helicopter
snowplow whatever the you know parenting
term is and then i handed them back to
you
at 26 brain is done developing yeah
but you now your heart aches to help
them
how do you break them out of that mode
of thinking
oh that's wow what a great question
somehow not something i had ever
considered before
what what if i were meeting my zach or
toby now 16 and 14
10 years from now having been raised in
a very different
more typical i think now parenting
family well probably a
also it is true that they you know one
or both of them would have been given
drugs for their activity right you know
because they would have been diagnosed
with adhd and would be
again would it be given speed so that's
a whole other rabbit hole that we can go
down but
so you know i meet them at 25 26
um they are you know kid's totally
capable
but hasn't lived and hasn't had to solve
problems for himself
and i like yes i also did academic
things and for a kid like that
for a young a young man like that often
those
young male students at first had a very
difficult time
turning in assignments on time um
they you know or they were just rule
followers but they did it sort of to the
letter and never expanded beyond and
never
showed me what else they could do and
how where they could take it that was
more interesting
but i think
week two of almost every class that i
taught we did
a five-day field trip somewhere just
domestic somewhere um
until the very last couple of years
somewhere where there was no internet or
cell service
that became more and more difficult to
find um in
2016 2017 but from 2002
through 2015 or so uh when i when i was
teaching it was it was pretty easy so
you go
to eastern washington scab lands of of
eastern washington
or up to the san juans to uh moran state
park on orcas island
or or uh even to the oregon coast
and yes there's academic work and you
know
largely i would be teaching them the
beginnings of how to be animal
animal behaviorists how to observe and
once you can you know take the observer
out as much as possible
you know and observe without bias how to
take data that is that is careful and
that doesn't
include your interpretation in the data
that's the academic part
it's not the main reason to go spend
five days you know with a group of 25 or
50 people
in you know rustic cabins where they are
they have been broken into groups
they've chosen their own groups before
we go
they're food groups and every food group
has is taking responsibility for one or
two meals
um to feed everyone and we have access
to a commercial kitchen
and you know i give them i give them i
give them my little spiel in advance and
i say
you know we've collected enough money
i'm giving you enough money back that
you can buy real food
i want you to buy you know i want you to
buy real vegetables and real grains at
real meats and you know
organic when you can and all of this and
you know don't buy the canned stuff i
don't want to see
you know blue drinks on the table um
it but you know do do what you know to
do
and then watch what everyone else is
doing they cook together
we all eat together we all have opinions
about the food that we've eaten
by this group and that group and we
sit around the campfire together and at
each meal i sit with different groups
and yes there's academic work on these
field trips but i make myself available
without ever saying it really you know
it's not office hours i'm having office
hours now so if you want to talk to me
you can come no that's terrifying to
people
and people only come to office hours you
know if it's called office hours they
come to office hours if they know they
have an academic question
right but if you sit around on the grass
after frisbee game or after a meal and
you say okay the next academic thing is
it two
it's now one i haven't said anything
about where i'll be but i'm just sitting
here
and i look approachable and
that 26 year old young man or young
woman it's easier for me to imagine
because i've got two boys a young man
comes to me and just starts talking
then it's easy it's it's it's downhill
from there because
as soon as they start talking and saying
well
actually i do kind of want to do x oh
really what
why well because i you know i once
saw it on in a movie or my friend did it
but i wasn't allowed to because my
parents didn't didn't let us do that
or you know more often in the case of
what i would see was
we just didn't we just didn't have the
money you know like i said we had we had
a tremendous number of low-income
students um and so i'd say okay we let's
let's figure out how to make this happen
without the resources but by
let's what i mean is i want to clear as
many hurdles from your road as possible
but this is you
this is you doing this such that when
you are done with this process
you can look back on it and say i did
that and therefore i can do
the next thing and the next thing and
the next thing so that's
that's definitely an incomplete answer
but it's part of it it's just like sort
of
being open letting can there be a space
like on a field trip where there is
nothing expected of anyone else
in terms of what they're doing at the
moment and maybe they're off smoking a
joint and maybe they're off showering
and you know maybe like who knows
right um and you know i hope not they
weren't supposed to but like i'm sure
that was going on
um and maybe the fact that i'm sitting
there and they're sitting there
and there's there's a possibility for
some relationship to happen
that's serendipity and leaving ourselves
open for serendipity
is one of the big pedagogical
things that i started to do with
intentionality
probably for the second half of my being
a college professor when i realized that
that was actually
that that's something that you can't
then quantize you can't count how much
serendipity did i allow
like no you have to leave white space
you have to leave the open space
and then be open to what happens
that is uh this may be the the sort of
most stereotypical male versus female
response to that so
if i was in the same position and you
said tom look
zach or toby this is what happened i
need you now to
get them you know in line with this set
of values let's say that you handed to
me
i'd be like all right rad you cool if i
kidnapped them because i'm going to take
them for a year
onto an island and i'm going to take
seven or eight people
that are exactly that i'm going to put
them on
this island with those people and just
because those are the only people around
they're gonna want their respect so much
that whatever the values are of that
group they're going to
conform to the values of those people
and there's a great quote i forget who
said it but
when you go to a company do not for a
second think that that company will
conform to you
you are going to conform to that company
i thought oh man that's so important for
people to think about when they're
taking a job or whatever it's like
man you might think that you were just
this killer agent of change but let me
tell you like
you will very rapidly conform to the
norms of that little group that you're
in
and that to me like when i think about
the isolation that happens in social
media is beyond terrifying yeah
but whatever ecosystem you create for
yourself
you're going to conform to the norms of
that group
and that [__] is so scary to me and
you you and brett talked about and i
thought whoa
one of the reasons heather that i am not
a parent is i don't think i could put my
kids in a situation where they might
break their arm
and you gave your kids rules about
not getting hurt that i was i was so
impressed
but equally shocked do you remember the
rules that you gave your kids
yeah um and yeah we ended up formalizing
some slightly different rules for our
students on study abroad as well
um yeah the rules for the boys were
take risks take physical risks and
you cannot break your head or your back
or your sense organs you know your your
eyes in particular those those don't
heal those won't those don't grow back
but you can break an arm and you can
break a leg and it's better if you don't
um but you can do it and you know better
if you come real close
a couple times and not end up breaking
anything but
it's not a disaster given where given
when and where we live that is not a
disaster
there are disasters that are possible
and those are the ones that we've laid
out
so you know so this this it trains them
for all sorts of things it trains them
to actually learn how to fall and you
know our younger son
actually became became known in the
elementary school schoolyard as the boy
who bounces
he would jump from the craziest high
things and he would always get up and
run away
and people like my god i wouldn't let my
kid jump off something half that tall
like well this is what he's inclined to
do
and he's not the one who gets hurt you
know it's the kids who aren't ever
allowed to explore
who at the point that they do finally
take the risk and jump off something
much shorter
they jump as if their legs aren't aren't
springy and then yes they do
get fractures because they don't know
how to use their bodies they don't know
what their bodies are capable of
so yeah i mean both of our boys have um
have had injuries
that have been you know not great but
they've they've never hurt their heads
or their backs or you know or their
sense organs or their eyes and
you know they're these
you know how you how you end up raising
kids the environment in which you raise
them
is what they know how to do so we
we took them to the amazon when they
were
boy 12 and 10 i think i'm not sure
exactly maybe 11 and 9
and they because we spent so much time
in nature with them in uh in north
america
we trusted them and they were wearing
the appropriate gear like you always
have to wear rubber boots up to the
knees for
you know to to to defer to um
to deflect snakes should they come at
you um
and and you know they look they never
had that happen but
we we trusted them enough that they
could run ahead of us
on the trail in the amazon and once toby
came running back and said
giant snake and he had found this huge
coral snake which is a which is a deadly
snake
that we were then able to run ahead and
see and
certainly there was a moment there of oh
my god what have we done
you know like what did we let this child
do this is
i don't remember he was you know seven
or eight at the time i think
and um you know maybe a little older
than that i just can't remember exactly
when it was
um but when we were in quito
which is a massive latin american
capital with um
latin american driving uh we were
watching the cars go around some
roundabout and we watched a little kid
maybe three years old come out of an
apartment building and navigate the
traffic
and go into old tienda and come out with
a bag of something and navigate back and
go back
like wow we don't trust you guys to do
that we trust you in the amazon
and that little boy probably is not
trustworthy in the amazon because he's
probably never left quito
um so like you you know what you know
because of what you experience
there's just because that little kid was
ecuadoran doesn't mean he can do amazon
he's an urban kid whereas our boys had
and still have more experience
in deep nature than they do in urbanity
so
the thing is yes we get more flexible as
we ate less flexible as we age for sure
our brains get less plastic we get more
you know canalized into our particular
ways of thinking but
continuing to expose ourselves to more
and more experiences that are different
from anything we imagined is how to keep
that flexibility and it's
god it's part of why this you know this
this year 2020
and covet 19 and all of the restrictions
on mobility
um that have been imposed on us as a
result
are i am really concerned are just going
to further
further the mental health crisis uh that
is
that we are experiencing in our youth
and especially the children who
just couldn't spend any time exploring
making new relationships
jumping off jungle gyms you know for a
while there even those things were
were locked down because it was
considered unsafe my god
kids especially just need to explore and
you know the younger you are the more
everything you run into is new
so it's easier to have things be new
when you're young
yeah i'm uh when i think about kids that
are in a developmental phase right now
being locked down for this long man yeah
that is super unnerving what have you
guys done in fact your kids are like
smack
bang were you guys already homeschooling
them or has this been a total shake-up
for them
yeah it's hard and i think it's hard for
everyone there i don't
i haven't talked to anyone who says this
is great my kids love
vegetable school this is fabulous you
know i've heard a few
stories like well you know we're getting
more time together okay
good but um now our kids are at two
different schools
and it's they're neither of them has
seen the inside of a classroom since
march
and it's we're talking in mid-november
and
um they're 16 and 14 exactly at an age
when
peer groups and sociality and thinking
about the opposite sex
um is all happening and it's all virtual
uh and it's not you know the schools are
actually in many ways doing a much
better job than i was expecting
but it's an impossible job to do really
really well it's just
it's not what humans do you know this
this conversation that we're having
um i'm really enjoying and i really want
to be able to have it in person with you
right like i am this this makes me want
even more than i already did
to you know sit down with you and you
know and and your wife hopefully too
and you know and just and just and just
talk right and
this is great this is a you know this is
a really good second best but it's
definitely second best that's not even
close
think about crazy like the number of
cues that we pick up on
when you're sharing space that you can't
do over
the um over skype like you said look i'm
so glad that this didn't happen in the
early 90s
where whoa it would have really been
deranging and you'd be so isolated and
have
no way to like connect with other people
especially because i live in a different
state than most of my family
yikes that would be super gnarly
but still like not being able to
share space is is a huge disadvantage
yeah
not being able to share space and not
being able to travel and you know this
is this is just one of my
my passions not just for me but for
other people so another thing that i
that i did um which i um
i implied earlier but some of my
students who i took on study abroad so i
ran
four or five study abroad programs the
last of which was this long one that
brett and i've talked about that he and
i did together
but i did several earlier and
i helped students who had never left
like a 100 mile radius of their
birthplace get passports
and i took them to the jungle and i took
them to the andes and i took them to
coral reefs
and i blew their minds and it was
amazing
and you know these were mostly kids who
you know who loved lizards or who
loved you know just loved nature who
loved who you know who were who were
into the idea of the kinds of things we
were studying but again
the academics wasn't necessarily the
main
thing so actually just to return you
know you said
you would take um a kid and put him on
an island with eight other
eight other young adults and you know
create a culture to which they
create a culture that was admirable to
which they then wanted to conform
and i would say that was also that was
also part of what i was doing
um just at the you know part of what
creating the community creating the
culture
in the program the classroom the field
work whatever
was precisely about um
you know the professor has the authority
and it was
very useful to walk in and say do not
trust me because i have the authority
because i have the degree because
my salary is being paid by the
university to whom you pay tuition and
i'll be writing your
evaluations at the end uh i must earn
your trust i must earn your respect and
your trust
and at some point it will get exhausting
for you
to question every single thing i say so
you know hopefully i earn your respect
and trust sooner rather than later
but um at least at first don't assume
that i know what i'm talking about
so that's one way of giving away
authority that i think is very useful
but the fact is that the professor still
has the authority to set the tone
and to set the culture and to say no
actually
um we aren't going to be offended by
everything i'd like that's that's not a
useful way forward
and no you're not gonna you're neither
gonna tone police nor language
police but we're going to be respectful
and always
and we're going to be discussing
difficult things and
i will tell you what kinds of topics
we're talking about but
i'm not offering up trigger warnings
this isn't a safe space
like none of that we're not doing that
but
look around and if there if there are
people here
who you feel like you just can't be in a
room with
think about that but also if that's
really where you are
you need to find a different place to be
because i'm not changing them
because you've got something in your
head that tells you that you can't be
here
that is literally part of our document
we're saying earlier you have to write
down your rules of engagement one of the
things it says is this is not a safe
space like this we're gonna challenge
the life out of you
and what you just said about giving away
power
a what a sign of tremendous confidence
that
but i have a feeling it's not only
confidence in that i know my [__]
it's confidence in i actually want to
know if i'm wrong like
there would be no greater joy than to be
surrounded by people who can elevate my
game and help me like get to a better
place
and that in business yes you know i told
my staff i said look
i just spent the last almost 20 years
fighting to become a ceo
and now that i'm ceo and i'm the one
signing your paychecks
like i want i'm now giving all of that
away i'm not asking you for deference
so the only way that this becomes like i
sort of step into the ceo role is
we may get to a point where i cannot
convince you you cannot convince me
we need a final arbiter i will be that
final arbiter
but up until that point like i i
assume the vast majority of the things
that i think are wrong
and that my current skill set has
already taken me as far as it's going to
take me and the only way for me to get
where i want to go
is if people can show me where i'm wrong
help me get where i'm going and also
i don't scale so i need other people to
come in and be amazing
and the only way to get the best out of
people is like you said you give them
that space
to try something so i stole this idea
from ray dalio
he said i allow my part or my employees
to dent the car just never total it i
was like oh my god it's a genius
so we talk a lot about that like hey go
make mistakes you're going to cost me
money i get that
i'm all for it i'm super happy to invest
in that
don't do anything like you said don't
break your head don't break your back
don't damage your sense organs it's like
there are certain things i don't want
you to do
but at the end of the day like i want
you to challenge me
i want you to say i think that's stupid
so
i tell people um in my company that i
want my
feedback aggressive and in public and
the reason i want it aggressive and in
public is not because i think everybody
is ready for
their feedback to be aggressive and in
public you know with other people
be much more thoughtful but i said i
want you to see even if somebody comes
to me and says tom
you're an idiot this is the dumbest idea
i've ever heard
one i'm gonna be like first of all thank
you
because so many people are afraid to
speak to power so i'm just already
grateful that you're not afraid to say
what's on your mind
let me hear your argument and maybe
you're right and if you are then i will
immediately adopt your way of thinking
because it's going to get me to my goal
which again is my obsession and if i
have a good idea and you're wrong
then that idea will be able to withstand
that criticism if it can't withstand the
criticism
it wasn't a good idea in the first place
that's right and so there's like a
a sobriety that comes when your house is
on the line in a business
where it's like i'm no longer worried
about being right i just need to make
sure i don't lose my house and go out of
business
yeah so that has always been
tremendously clarifying for me
oh that's and that's i've heard you talk
before
about having sort of discovered by
accident the scientific method having
realized that some of the principles
that you had written
uh were in fact a description of the
scientific method and you've just you've
just described it again
right um at some level that exposing our
ideas
to our friends and our enemies is
the only way to help us get better at
thinking and to know
if our ideas are actually legitimate and
you know our enemies
are more likely to give us really crap
feedback because they're also motivated
um to you know to to be mean to you know
to not be nice to us but
mean or nice doesn't change whether or
not the actual thing is true
and so the enemies may actually also be
more motivated to
find the flaws and um and to say the
flaws
when they find them so trying to strip
and you know this is
i think this is a more male typical way
of receiving feedback so that you know
this is a challenge
that being open and you even if you
can't accept it in the moment
being open to feedback that comes in on
a channel that you find offensive
that you find tainted that you find ugly
or gross or whatever
stripping away all the tone and being
left with that nugget of whatever
it actually was if there was one and
that you know in in the modern
especially in the social media
environment
so often a lot of the critique just has
nothing inside of it you strip it you
strip it strip it there's nothing there
and so it was a waste of your time and i
think it makes people more resistant to
hearing critique
but you know honest critique even when
it comes coded in something ugly
okay maybe in the moment i'm not going
to be able to to
calm down to lower my temperature to
take away the tone that you're saying it
in and to consider whether or not you've
got the true thing
but it is a hundred percent incumbent on
me to at least
go away go private and go okay i've
calmed down now
i don't like how he said it and like
what his motivations were but is the
thing true
okay it's true well then now what do i
do one thing i at least owe
is to tell that person no matter no
matter how hateful they may be
you know what about that thing you were
right and i was wrong
and you know we we owe that to you know
frankly the whole the whole universe and
this is
i mean this is another rabbit hole that
we won't go down i'm sure but one of the
problems for instance
in in science now is that academic
publishing
effectively the peer review allows for
these little cabals
to self-congratulate each other and so
it's peer review is exactly supposed to
be
the exposing of ideas to all sorts of
diverse opinions
who will tell you know you or the
publisher that
of of the journal that you want to
publish in oh that's not a good idea
this shouldn't be published or you need
to go back and do an experiment with a
different design
instead because people are more and more
and more specialized you get like a
group of
i don't know 6 8 20 30 people who tend
to peer review each other's articles
and if you want to get a positive peer
review next time even though they're
anonymous they're not really anonymous
then you're more likely to give a
positive peer review now even if the
work isn't all that good
and so you end up with lower and lower
quality of work because you don't
actually have outside
opinion coming in and saying actually no
heather this is something i am uh i'm
obsessed with
so i had a moment of crisis
in my early 20s where um
long story but at the time i just wanted
to get rich and so my obsession was
getting rich rich rich
rich i showed up every day that's all i
wanted and
i um also was telling everybody
that um you know i wanted to get rich so
i had this tremendous amount of pressure
to sort of live up to that and
i got into this fight one time with the
people who were at the time my bosses
and i i started arguing for an idea that
i knew was dumb
i knew that it was not effective but
because they were smarter than me and i
kept hitting this sort of moment of
sort of um identity crisis where they
were smarter than me
and i didn't understand it at the time
but i valued myself for being smart
so here i was constantly running into
this like oh my god this makes me feel
so badly about myself
and so i needed to win this argument
because it would make me feel smart if i
could
get them to do what i wanted and i
remember i had this voice in my head
just screaming you know you're wrong
shut up like you know this won't work
what are you doing and they finally
probably just acquiesced and we're like
fine we'll you know we'll do it that way
and i walked away from that going what
is it you actually value
do you want to be rich or do you want to
be right do you want to feel good about
yourself and i realized
i need to feel good about myself but
man to get out of this weird like
conundrum of like fighting for bad ideas
just because they're my idea
it's not moving me towards my goal now i
don't think that my goal was exciting or
honorable at the time but just
that i was seeking a goal and it was
moving me away from that goal
and so i had this crisis which has since
served me incredibly well which is
i can choose to value myself for
something different
so i can choose instead of valuing
myself or in this case getting published
it's like you've created a pathological
value chain where you're you are
incentivized emotionally
to have people like your stuff even if
it isn't
moving the world forward so they have
unintentionally created this
i value myself for my peers acceptance
but they've never articulated it like
that in their head
either because they've never hit that
moment of crisis which i'm grateful to
have encountered in my early 20s
or they hit it and worse they just like
ah like shuffled it off and i'm not
going to think about that
right and the biggest breakthrough in my
life was be goal oriented now be
very very careful about what you set as
your goal
because you can take yourself down some
horrifying paths
but once you have a goal that's
honorable and exciting to you like
you're
just even if i fail at this thing i'm
having a great time and it would elevate
not only me but elevate other people
now it's like okay well if you become a
servant
to that goal you're seeking truth you're
trying to get better
you can own that i'm not yet good enough
to achieve that because you don't value
yourself for that you value yourself for
the sincere pursuit
of that thing and so when i see groups
like that i want to pull them aside and
go
you're only [__] up yourself like
history is going to judge you first of
all
and then some part of you knows that
this is a very fragile existence
that any moment somebody could come in
and like burst that bubble
i've just never understood people that
want to stay in that like
it it is i lived there for a long time
so no judgment that people get there
but it felt it was so anxiety provoking
because it was like i'm going to be
found out somebody's going to figure out
i don't know what i'm doing you know and
i value myself for that so much
just a horribly vulnerable position no
it's it's super vulnerable and i think
unfortunately academic science has
become
so much about it that it's very
difficult to escape it
and so you know you presumably people
mostly go into science because they're
interested in seeking truth
in figuring out what is actually real in
the universe whether or not they like it
or agree with it and you know maybe in
some of our cases so that they can
understand what's real
in order to make a better world in order
to know what is what is true at base so
that we can change those things that are
changeable
and um the the publishing system which
seems like this arcane little
branch but is actually the singular
measure
um along with grant getting that
scientists are most judged on
is so is is such is
such this little cluster this little
cabal that i described that you just
described in a different in a different
domain
that it's it's hard to see how
excellent science is actually being done
right that um
excellent science is not
to some degree actually discouraged it's
actually discouraged but it's also
um there's no check on it there's no
outside
force in a lot of cases that saying you
could have done
better like this this this really could
have been done better
and you know like you you made a point
earlier i can't remember exactly what it
was about but
you once once you have a paper out there
that's the thing that gets known if it
gets known at all
if you end up having to retract it
because it wasn't true wasn't right
very few people hear about that the
paper is the thing people hear about so
i think it was you were talking about an
accusation you know random false
accusations are made
and if they turn out to be false it's
the person's reputation against whom
the bad accusation was made is still
affected it never goes back
and so the sort of flip side of that is
you get papers out and people know you
had papers out oh having to quietly go
oh actually the you know the statistics
weren't good
or the you know the methods could have
been better to actually demonstrate my
point
this is not the thing that is uh
encouraged by the
by the way that academic science works
the thing in the culture wars which by
the way i never thought i would talk
about
ever in a million years um and
what started drawing me in is
how i think it's self-corrosive that
people are not setting themselves up for
success and remember my definition of
success is fulfillment so that thing
that is resilient to failure but makes
you feel good about yourself
yeah i mean i've always summed it up
saying all that matters in life it's not
success money fame notoriety nothing it
is how you feel about yourself
when you're by yourself there's no one
there to hype you up or tear you down
like what do you think
you think you're on the right path
you're doing good and honorable things
like
that that matters a lot and so
i see people moving in a way that i
think will be counterproductive to
them achieving that end and in all of
this
the thing in the culture war that scared
me the most is
hashtag shut down stem and that's why i
was like i'm sorry what
like there there is an assault
on being logical that i find
particularly bizarre
as somebody who looks at things from an
evolutionary lens do you have a sense
like
what are they doing what are they doing
um it's it's a full-on assault as you
said it is
it is both amazing and surprising and
not surprising at all
when you take a bigger picture and see
the various um
the various lines of attack that they're
taking it is
it's the same activism that emerges from
the same
confusion about reality honestly which
is
you know depending on how you view it
you know
it's sort of emerging from
post-modernism it's this
intersectionality it's critical race
theory
it's you know it's all of these sorts of
ways of
thinking about what humans are that
one of which has as its foundation the
idea that
we create our reality that
there is i mean the most extreme form of
it is that actually the reality
reality doesn't exist absent are um our
sense of it
and um the the sort of the weaker forms
are there is no judgment free or
moral free assessment of things and
therefore the very scientific method
is flawed because it imagines a
possibility for objectivity so i'm
trying to steal man
what what you guys gonna say what what's
the flaw then in that
what's the flaw in that is that the
scientific method is exactly
the you know if you do it once if you
make an observation
and try to pause as many possible
hypotheses as you possibly
as you can for what might have caused
that and you actually have a complete
solution set of hypotheses
and then you create a good experimental
design that actually can allow you to
delineate between those hypotheses
and then you collect good data and then
you do the appropriate analysis on those
data
then what comes out at the end is
still just one result right it just
tells you
that under these circumstances at this
time with
you know a flawed human being doing the
work this is what i this is what i found
and yes we use statistics but
you know you know every at every step in
the process there's the possibility for
error
and the thing about the scientific
process that
is not as often talked about is that it
is inherently
cyclical you have to do it and do it and
do it and do it again
and the modern the way that science gets
funded now there's almost no impetus
to redo work right to have some other
lab across the
country across the world do the same
kind of work that you just did
unless it honestly unless it has medical
implications right unless there's sort
of
money and lives on the line so for
most work it gets done once um if it's
if it's good
and you know depending on what that
means it'll get published and then
no one ever goes back and looks and and
looks at it so there's a lot of
i'm sure 100 that there are a lot
of results out there that are published
that people are basing other research on
that aren't actually true that don't
hold simply because
even though the original research may
have been completely well
intentioned and the people doing the
work tried to do everything right there
was just some error
some problem that they couldn't see and
because the work because no one ever
tried to replicate it we didn't see that
it wouldn't replicate
so it's the replication part of the
scientific process that is what protects
us from the idea that we that we can't
be objective
no individual humans can't be fully
objective
we have to recognize our biases are you
know we are of course
seeing the world entirely through our
senses but
you take my biases and your biases and
that guy's biases and her biases
and you all come together and you you
apply your different biases to the same
problem
if you come up with the same answer over
and over and over again
you have a good sense that the asymptote
that you're approaching
is truth is is reality right and so
that doesn't pretend that we're
objective but it does
say the foundation that if you don't
agree with this i don't know what kind
of conversation we can have
there is an objective reality out there
there is
how close are we to discovering it in
some places we're really close in some
places not at all in some places
i'm sure i think we're closer than we
actually are and something will get
turned on its head
i would put a tremendous amount of money
on you know the theory of natural
selection not being overturned
ever anytime right but there are
a lot of other things even you know
within within
biology that we probably think are true
that aren't
that doesn't mean the objective reality
changed it means that our understanding
of what
it was changed so shut down stem is
terrifying because it's coming from
people who are credentialed in
and practicing as scientists which means
that they either really don't understand
what science is
in which case what are they right what
are they doing or
this is a bad faith effort it's a power
grab
and you know the the all the language of
post-modernism is about power so that
wouldn't surprise me
but it's it's disingenuous is the
kindest word i can put on it
in that case yeah the the word that i
want people to
develop a nice healthy obsession with is
utility
and utility again it comes down to your
goal so what's your goal and if their
goal is power then hey maybe there
really is a lot of utility
in what they're doing and shut down stem
and all that but
then we need to put the goal out on the
table and to me
the only way to navigate the
quote-unquote culture war
is to put our goals on the table and now
we can talk about
the goals right so the goal that freaks
me out
is equity or equal outcome right i'm all
about
equal opportunity i i have literally
given my life my wife and i could have
bought an island and retired and never
worked again
and yet we stepped back to the table
before all this kicked off
and said what we care about is look
there are these people in the inner
cities they're really [__] struggling
and
their zip code is the number one
predictor of their future success not
even their iq
their iq would already bother me but the
fact that their
zip code is more predictive of their
future success than even their iq
i was like that is a world i can't live
in so
what's the thing and i already talked
about it earlier but it's like getting
people to think in a way that's going to
be useful for them to
hit their goal and i'll shorthand that
to what carol dweck calls a growth
mindset like if you have a growth
mindset you're in that relentless
problem-solving mode and
you know you're going to go about as far
as a human
with your hand that you were dealt in
terms of intellect and stuff like that
you're going to
maximize that or get to as close to
maximizing that as possible
and so when i think about all right if
we put that goal on the table
now we can assess like what does that
look like how do you have to get there
and we can just debate the realities of
okay one is at a desirable end state two
if we even agree that that's a desirable
end state then how do we go about
getting it that sidesteps tyranny right
so cause the earliest discussions are
gonna be oh you can get there
authoritarian like rule clamp down on
everybody
take away from people that achieve too
much give to people that have achieved
too little
like we could talk through exactly what
you'd have to do and we can ask has this
experiment been run
in that case yes it has what if the
outcomes have been you know so
there it it becomes a game that can
actually be
played but when we won't like state
okay i am trying to achieve this state
and make people say it in a sentence
because man people will waffle and it's
like one thing that i've trained my team
to do
is nobody is more prone to waffling than
i am
but i when i have something that matters
i can give it to you in a sense
and when you can state something that
clearly
now we can aim to it and we can measure
whether we're making progress on it or
not
and that's why i feel like we're in this
[__] death loop of like
yeah people talking around each other
changing words it's like oh my god what
is happening
yeah what is happening um it's not
entirely good faith
is is a big part of it that um i think
i do think that there are germs of good
ideas and reasonable critiques
at the foundation of pretty much all of
this culture war stuff
but it is cloaked and in
and driven by uh abusive
power seeking at this point and you know
the thing
the thing that both brett and i have
said a number of times is that it looks
very much like
there is not people are not seeking
some the bad faith actors who are
largely driving the conversation and
yelling the loudest they're certainly
the loudest
and so they get they get more of the
airspace than they deserve
are not actually trying to end
oppression
they're trying to turn the tables
they're trying to reverse the direction
the polarity of the oppression that has
historically existed
and and also define define all of these
uh power relationships in as simple as
terms as possible often
and often these are wrong right they or
they just ignore
a tremendous amount of nuance of where
power actually lives
so um yeah
part of part of why it's hard to fight
back against is
that people want to assume that when
someone says something even on social
media even from anonymous account or
a non-anonymous account but it's a
person you don't know and you're never
going to
meet in real life they want to assume
that it's coming from a place of honesty
and increasingly that's not true so
how is it i mean i think i think
interestingly you and i probably did
very similar things
in your you know team in our team
building uh work
actually and you know team building for
business team building within
educational programs academic programs
for the undergraduates
on a team in real life with 10 20 30
40 people you can see and you don't
always see it
early on and they can hide but you can
see
when someone is not doing what they say
they're doing when they're
up to no good right and i'm not talking
about lazy or slacking i'm talking about
like
sociopathic behavior right these people
are rare but they exist
and it's you you never the
reason it's effective is that you never
assume that someone is going to be
coming from that place
we assume that we look into people's
eyes and they see us the same way we see
them
and a very few people in the world don't
i think that lacking the real life
interchanges such as exists on social
media allows
more and more people to act that way to
basically have a facultative which is
just as opposed to obligate but like i
can
i could take it on i could put it on i
could take it off a facultative
sociopathy in which they regard other
people these other accounts that they're
interacting with
as if they're not quite human right and
so we have this like dehumanization
where we're treating people like they're
like like we're parts
like you're white and you're male and
you're cis and you're straight
and you're successful and you know okay
those are all true but is that
is that the best description of you that
i could give in that many words
no in no way right and yet those things
that i just said about you
for instance will be the categories
that these these bad faith players and
that many people in the culture wars
right now
want to use to entirely define you not
just start not just as a starting place
but just like and that's it
we're done now i know everything i need
to know about you
really like that's never been the case
in human history before
that though the five demographic
descriptors were sufficient because
we're all
we're all individually amazing
and distinct very very
very well said um i have to ask
you write science fiction why aren't you
publishing science fiction
well um so when i started college i
wanted to write science fiction that
that was my goal
that was when when you were um lying
face down on the carpet with the nylon
imprint on your face
uh with with a goal i had a goal which
was i'm gonna write science fiction i
love science
i love writing is writing is one of the
things that that brings me the most joy
in the world
and um and has for since i was a
teenager
that's what i wanted to do um so i
was a literature major and i was taking
astronomy and geology
and i was driven pretty crazy this would
have been the late 80s early 90s
i was driven pretty crazy by the
literature classes and the writing
classes that i was in
because they had what i didn't have the
words for then but sort of the kernels
of this new this post-modernism that has
now taken over the academy and has now
taken over the media and
tech companies and is moving out into
the world um
it was we weren't
allowed and you know this this is just
one particular way of approaching
literature and so i was just in one
little bubble but we weren't allowed to
just read the texts
and focus on the texts we had to bring
in all of the truth about the author's
life and um and interpret it through
his usually politics and the and
and such and i thought you know i i see
a value in that but i also want to be
able to
experience the art the product the you
know whatever it is
as it is because if it can't stand on
its own then it's
really not worthy of being called
literature or art or whatever it is
and then over in my writing classes i
was told
literally on the first day of college i
walked into my creative writing class
and there was a list of genres on the
board and it was like detective fiction
romance sci-fi fantasy and
the teacher went up to the board and put
an x through them and said we don't do
that here we don't we don't do genre
fiction
yep we don't do that here and i thought
god why not
okay maybe i have something to learn um
i mean i had
i had been taking as a high school
student i had been taking some classes
at ucla and sci-fi i was like
i think we do do that in college you
know i'm pretty i'm pretty sure we're
allowed to do that
um but this teacher wanted very staid
very sort of generic in my mind easy to
predict sort of
boy has dog boy loses dog boy gets dog
back stories
and you know i'm i'm i'm up for a good
tear jerker every now and again but it's
hardly the only kind of story i want to
read
right and i've heard you also talk about
narrative
excuse me and you know changing people's
minds through narrative
is one of absolutely my my passions i
love narrative i deep i
delve into narrative tremendously and my
sense was
i know science i speak science and
i love to write i can affect people how
people view
possibility how how people view what is
true or what the possible is
through narrative through science
fiction so within a couple of years i
thought
you know what this is not this is not
working for me this literature major
thing
at least in this in this climate isn't
working for me also
i see that i'm going to need to live in
order to have things to write about
that just identifying as a writer just
being a writer
sort of training as a writer doesn't
inherently give you the experiences to
write about so
um long long story short which you know
like i can tell you over drinks at some
point or something
i ended up pursuing a phd in biology and
evolutionary biology
which also allowed me to travel and to
you know i spent
over a year over a few field seasons
living in a tent in madagascar
and i did work in central america and
um you know i got i got all the
experiences that i was hoping for and
you know
and and still crave and and want more of
and then took a job in academia because
this job at evergreen
seemed amazing and knew then okay what i
want
i i still do want to be writing the
science fiction and
our kids came along pretty quickly and i
was basically i was
i was teaching i was being an educator
of evolutionary biology and i was being
a mom and that's what i did and then
literally
my first sabbatical in 15 years of
teaching came
the last two quarters as it turns out
that i was at evergreen in
early 2017. and i had it
i had it all planned out like i'm gonna
i'm gonna see if this thing that i've
had in the back of my mind that i wanna
have wanted to do forever
is actually something i can do or am i
deleting myself because maybe i am i
don't
who knows i know when i'm distracted
when i'm in the heads of 25 or 50
undergraduates so
fully i cannot take myself out of that
and take myself out of parenting and
delve into character development and
and write narrative so while i'm on
sabbatical i'm going to write a science
fiction novel
and i did and i wrote it i wrote the
first draft in three months and i
literally finished the second draft
the day that the riots broke out at
evergreen
literally on may 23 2017 and i had you
know i already had some of the agents i
was go i had
i was contacting i was going to try to
start sending it out
and then everything in our world fell
apart and just became a totally
different whirlwind of experience so
i am super grateful i have this i have
this book
that i'm still very interested in
getting back to that i
love actually the idea is it's a it's
humans
searching for other evolutions of
consciousness in the galaxy
and um i will i will not tell you
whether or not they find it
um and so you know my pitch
in what i wrote to agents was most great
science fiction gets the physics right
but gets the biology wrong this gets
both right
so you know i created another planet in
which i you know i
i had great fun i went downstairs at one
point where i was writing it
to brett i said okay i got my
spreadsheet i know exactly what the size
is and how far it is and what kind of
star it is and
it's like you know you can't put a
spreadsheet in a novel
like i know but i now know exactly what
this planet looks like from like the
astronomical and physical
perspective and now from that i can
build the life on it i can i can create
what the life on that planet could
potentially have looked like given
you know even just like what spectrum of
light the star was emitting and
therefore what kinds of sense organs the
life on that planet might have
might have evolved so that's i've really
only written this one this one thing
which is
in you know fully drafted but would
require me to go back and spend real
time with it again before i
send it out to anyone at this point man
well as somebody who
is um i mean the whole reason impact
theory exists is ultimately to
create fiction content um and uh
sci-fi is our sort of core genre that we
play in we only do
genre fiction uh so we're the exact
opposite of your teacher
um i really hope that that makes it into
the world someday
um heather this has been a tremendous
pleasure your mind
is extraordinary if your
science fiction story is anything like
you direct to camera
it will be an amazing read so i really
really do hope that it makes it out
there someday and if i can be useful to
you by the way
in any way shape or form with that let
me know i would do it in a heartbeat
but thank you so much for spending this
time with me today
thank you so much tom it's been a
tremendous pleasure
absolutely phenomenal guys if you aren't
watching the dark horse podcast
which she co-hosts man get on it it's
amazing check out her patreon by the way
which is
a has a bunch of really interesting
information on there
um and the deeper you go into her world
the more
you are going to come away with profound
insights realizations uh
a bigger heart i mean it's really really
incredible um somebody at her
intellectual level
and with her sort of spirit of
compassion is pretty extraordinary
and speaking of extraordinary things if
you haven't already be sure to subscribe
and until
next time my friends be legendary take
[Music]
care
you